---
title  : Hyperion
tags: [book-review]
---

author : Dan Simmons
start  : 08 May 2020
end    : 25 May 2020 
rating : 4.0

This book is structured as 6 short stories, each the backstory of a different member of the party, slowly revealing to us the nature of the Time Tombs, the Shrike, and why each of these people was chose for the role.


Father Hoyt -- this tale is actually the story of Father Paul Dure, an anthropologist who goes to investigate the reclusive and mysterious Bikura people on the planet of Hyperion. This is a really well written story. It does a good job of setting the mood for the rest of the stories, demonstrating the tragic nature of the tales to come. It also has some of the best worldbuilding of the stories -- everything from the forest to the sheer alien-ness of the Bikura culture, to the wonderful idea for the underground cathedral and the labyrinth. The mystery of the Bikura is really enthralling. Dure's character was also really well written -- his conflicting loyalties to the church and the legacy, his guilt over what he had done to save the Church, his love for his friend, and his hunger to understand the Bikura. I would have liked if the mysteries tied more directly in to the plot with the Shrike and the Time Tombs -- as it was, it felt like a standalone short story, rather than a piece of a larger mystery -- and I hope that we get more information on the maze and the cathedral and the cruciform later.

Colonel Kassad -- I didn't enjoy this story, which is a shame, because it contains one of the biggest revelations in the book (that the Time Tombs send a person backward through time) and it characterizes Kassad who is one of the more important people in the actual plot (like figuring out how to activate the train/cable/gondola thing). Kassad's backstory was incredibly dry. It was just "person in the military doing military things". We spend a lot of time just watching him train, which I have no interest in, and then he just goes to a bunch of random planets I'm not familiar with quelling rebellions for the Hegemony, which I also do not care about. Really, it read like a biography or a history book. The mystery in this short story was also kinda boring. Until the end, it just amounted to "hot girl who Kassad sometimes has sex with", and as we will find out in the next several stories, Simmons just needs to stop writing sex. 

Martin Silenus -- This was quite good. I really like that we met someone from Old Earth and got to see a little bit of the history of the Hegemony, the prose was really well done here (I suppose it makes sense, cause Silenus is a poet), and this is the first time (that I found) where we begin to discuss whether the raw, unfettered capitalism and profit centered nature of this world is actually ideal, as Silenus is forced to write crappy books just to appease his publisher. The reveal of his "muse" being the Shrike is interesting, but I guess I didn't fully understand what that meant, which softened the impact a bit. I think part of this is because of the epistolary format of these each episode, just being "Notes on some event", which made it a bit harder to fit everything into a cohesive picture.

Sol Weintraub -- God this tale was incredibly heart-wrenching. Imagining a person waking up, every day, not remembering anything that happened the previous day, and getting younger each day, is probably one of the best "fate worse than death"s that I've ever seen. The emotions are so unbelievably well realized here, the portrayal of Sol and his wife as completely innocent people who just want to live their life made it all the more impactful when his wife died. This was just masterful.

Brawne Lamia -- This one was also quite well written. The worldbuilding we get about the cybrids and the AI in general was really interested (though it's kind of overshadowed by the reveal we get from the Consul later on), but I also really appreciate how Simmons took the time to develop the governmental system and the human-AI interaction in this world. My only wish is that they didn't have sex. The way that read was just cringy, and I would have liked Brawne and Johnny to have been friends. 

Consul -- This tale was interesting. I'm not entirely sure how important Siri's tale was, but I did enjoy it (after I got over some of the cringy romance at the beginning, the rest of the story, with Maui-Covenant being joined into the Hegemony, of the events in Siri's life were well written). I'm not entirely sure what the impact of the reveal about Siri being cremated was supposed to be, but it was interesting nonetheless. I also have to commend Simmons for managing to put a flashback within a flashback. Very few authors I know can do that well. The part that's more relevant to the overall story, in my opinion, is the Consul's story of meeting the Ousters, and realizing that the AI had been outwitting them all along. This was a rather interesting reveal, as was the Ouster's magic device, but "the AI is controlling everything" was just a bit too trope-y.

Overall, Simmons has a masterful command of language. I really enjoyed his prose, and he did a lovely job painting an extremely vivid image. The world he builds are extremely colorful, and his characters are relatable and complex and flawed. I wish he had some more platonic friendships, if only because the sex scenes were all _really_ cringy, but overall, really great. 
