---
title  : Inferno
tags: [book-review]
---

author : Dante Alighieri
start  : 22 May 2020
end    :  7 Jun 2020
rating : 3.0

This was the first epic poetry that I'd read, so I didn't really know what I was getting into, and don't really have many thoughts or anything to compare it to (which is among the reason I gave it a 3.0, right in the middle). For much of the beginning, I struggled to read the poetry (I was reading Longfellow's translation), so I would read a prose version I found (by Kline), and then read the poetry afterward. For a while in the middle, I would read the prose afterward, or just skim over it and look at the pictures. By the end, I was comfortable enough reading just the poetry, so hopefully, I'll be able to enjoy more poetry in the future. 

I unfortunately did not pick up on the _majority_ of symbolism. I know that at the beginning, for example, the animals represented some countries, but for most of the story, I just couldn't bring myself to care about the symbolism that much. The overall message I got is that God really hates people that aren't pious. He quite strongly criticizes indulgences and simony and the practice of selling church offices. At one point, he even says, that it's impious to feel pity for the damned, because they are receiving the rightful punishment ordained by God, and to feel pity, you must be so arrogant to believe God's judgement was faulty, which is a disturbingly authoritarian sentiment.

Generally, I enjoyed this story largely because of the creative punishments. It was always interesting to see what Dante had though up, whether it's people being tied up with snakes or swimming in a river of shit, it was always, creative and usually at least somewhat interesting.

