---
title: Complex Conjugates and Matrix Transposes
tags: [math]
---

so an orthogonal matrix (i.e. a rotation matrix) is one where Q^T*Q = I (confirm this for yourself, its very easy, for a matrix to be orthogonal, any two columns must have a dot product of zero, unless they're the same column, in which case the dot product must be one). Equivalently, Q^T = Q^-1 -- so the transpose for an orthogonal matrix is the same as its inverse -- and what makes orthogonal matrices special is that it doesn't scale the vectors its multiplied with -- so the transpose is the inverse for a rotation 

now this might remind you of complex numbers. any complex number a + bi can be written in polar form as a (uniform) scale + a rotation -- r*e^iθ. You might now want to write that rotation as a rotation matrix -- r*[[cosθ sinθ] [-sinθ cosθ]] (written in column-major order). But notice r*cosθ is literally just a, and r*sinθ is just b, so your matrix is now just [[a b] [-b a] (again, column major order) -- and it should be clear that multiplying that matrix with a vector has the same effect as multiplying the corresponding complex numbers, and so therefore, matrices of the form [[a b] [-b a]] are actually isomorphic to the complex numbers (and also closed under multiplication). They're also "anti-symmetric" in a sense, notice that the off-diagonal terms are negatives of each other (this comes from the fact that symmetric matrices are ones where A^T = A, while orthogonal matrices are ones where A^T = A^-1, so the two are opposites, in some sense)

anyway -- this is where it gets to the interesting bit -- the complex conjugate of a + bi is a - bi. Notice that the transpose of [[a b] [-b a] is [[a -b] [b a]] -- which is just the matrix for the complex conjugate! So for this subset of "complex-number-ish matrices", the transpose is just the complex conjugate. Recall that the complex conjuagte is the complex number with the same magnitude, but the opposite angle -- this make sense given what we saw earlier with rotation matrices. There's two final things to do -- (a) generalize this notion to arbitrary matrices, and (b) check out what happens when we multiply a matrix by its transpose

Notice, the complex conjugate is really nice in polar form -- its just r*e^{-iθ}. What's polar form for matrices? Turns out it looks something like A = RP, where R is a rotation matrix (analogous to e^{iθ}, and P is something called a symmetric and positive-semi-definite matrix, analogous to r in a complex number, that you can think of a non-uniform scaling). Lets derive it: You might be tempted to start with the singular value decomposition, which says for any m x n matrix A, we can write it as as A = USV^T, where U is an m x m the orthogonal matrix of "singular vectors", V is an n x n orthogonal matrix of singular vectors, and S (often written with a sigma, but I don't wanna fuck around with latex rn) is a diagonal matrix of "singular values" (if you're interesting in the proof of this, lmk, I understand it now!!). We want to get a rotation matrix (i.e. an orthogonal matrix) R -- so you might naturally pick the two orthogonal bits of the singular value decomposition R = U*V^T. That would mean that if we made P = VSV^T, then A = RP = UV^T*VSV^T = USV^T (where the last equality holds because V is orthogonal so V^T*V = I. Great -- now we have the polra decomposition of a matrix 

Lets take the transpose of it! The transpose of a product (AB)^T = B^T * A^T (you should confirm that this makes sense), so if A = RP, then A^T = (RP)^T = P^T * R^T -- but notice, R^T = R^-1 (because R is orthogonal), and P^T = P (because P is symmetric, because (VSV^T)^T = VSV^T, since S is a diagonal matrix, and V^T^T = V). So therefore, A^T = P*R^{-1} = PR^T, that is the transpose of a matrix is the same matrix, except with the rotation-y bit inverted

But wait -- we don't actually know very much about P -- how do I know there isn't any "rotation-ness" going on in P? I already showed P is symmetric, so its definitely not orthogonal -- but maybe it uses its "scaling" effect to invert it. Lets show that's not the case: I said earlier that P is positive-semi-definite (PSD) -- what does that mean? a matrix is PSD if x^T A x >= 0 for all x (and if its strictly greater than 0, then we call it "positive definite" (PD), or sometimes just "positive)). x^T A x is just the dot product of x with Ax, so its positive if x and Ax "point in the same direction" (and its zero if they're 90 degrees apart). An equivalent characterization of positive-(semi)-definiteness is whether all the eigenvalues are positive (or non-negative in the case of semi-definiteness). This is easy to see, because an eigenvector of A satistifes Ax = lambda*x, so x^T A x = lambda * x^Tx, but x^T*x is just the norm of x, so its guaranteed to be positive, so in order for x^T A x to be positive/non-negative, all the lambda's also have to positive/non-negative (and the converse is also true since any x can be written as a linear combination of its eigenvectors for a diagonalizable matrix).  But wait! We already know the eigenvalues of P because it just VSV^T, so we've already diagonalized P (i.e. written it in the form of PDP^-1, where the columsn of P are the eigenvectors, and D is a diagonal matrix with the eigenvalues), so the entries of S are just the eigenvalues of P, and they're positive, since the singular values in the construction of the SVD are the square-roots of eigenvalues, which means they're positive.


Last section! What happens when we multiply the transpose by the matrix? A^T*A. Thinking back to the analogy with complex numbers, multiplying by the conjugate gives you a real number which is the square of the magnitude of the complex number. Notice a couple of things -- A^T*A is symmetric (take the transpose of it, (A^T*A)^T = A^T * A^T^T  = A^T*A). A^T*A is also positive-(semi)-definite -- x^T A^T A x = (Ax)^T Ax = ||Ax||^2 -- assuming A is full rank, A^T*A is positive definite, since the norm is always positive, and if its not, then it might be zero.

