1. religion is a hierarchy, the same way the state or the patriarchy is. It gives one group of people (the priesthood) arbitrary power over another (the followers). I generally oppose hierarchy categorically, but if you want utilitarian impacts, i'd point you to the child abuse in the catholic church, similar but less reported incidents in protestant churches, and abuses of power that occur generally. 
2. The ideas that religion perpetuate justify other hierarchies. In the same way in which capitalist hierarchies and racial hierarchies justify each other, religion provides yet another justification for other hierarchies, but is particularly pernicious. Every ruling class in the history of religion has used religion to justify it, from the divine right of kings, to Carnegie's gospel of wealth, to conservatives throughout american history dog whistling about "Protestant middle-class values", to the caste system in India -- everywhere, religion has served to justify and perpetuate other hierarchies. 
3. The marxist analysis, religion is the "opium of the people". This quote is often misunderstood, its not just colorful language to diss religion. Marx uses the word opium very deliberately. Religion dulls the pain of class conflict, it presents an illusion about life after death, where all will have been made right. You might say this is critiquing a particular religious tendency, instead of religion in general, but I'd point out that these ideas are _ubiquitous_ across religion -- Hindu rhetoric about fulfilling your dharma in society is virtually _identical_ to Christian rhetoric about working hard. In effect, religion reduces people's immediate suffering, replacing it with pleasant illusions much the same as opium does. Wikipedia has a good article on this.
4. Religion's opposition to science. Again, this might seem like a criticism of particular religious ideas, instead of religion as a whole, but every single religion requires accepting some fundamental truths without question. Further, those fundamental truths make up a "general theory of this world", an "encyclopedic compendium", so its _inevitable_ that religion comes into conflict with science. This happens not only because religion directly contradicts science at times (think evolution), but also because religion trains people to not be critical thinkers, to accept certain facts without question, making them susceptible to other forms of pseudoscience, like alternative medicine and flat eartherism -- there is an empirical positive correlation between religiosity and pseudoscience. 
5. Religion breeds nationalism, sectarianism, and religious violence. This one is self-explanatory, virtually no religion tolerates the existence of others. Even historically, when one religion has tolerated another, they've very rarely been giving anything resembling equal status, and its only a matter of time before violence breaks out. Even the middle east today, though we can point to US intervention being a cause, the pre-existing religious conflict was also a cause. It wouldn't be nearly this bad if the Sunni-Shia divide did not already exist, it wouldn't be nearly this bad if there wasn't a history of millenia of conflict in the area. To bring it back to Marxism, though I tend not to like Marx's historiography, I think its applicable here -- the workers of the world can't unite if religion exists to divide them.
