---
title: Engineering is not Building Shit.
tags: [rant]
---

engineering is not building shit. carpenters build shit, windowmakers and chandlers and cobblers and cabinetmakers and apholsterers and manual laborers built shit long before anyone had ever head of engineering. engineering is also not about trial and error. its not building something several times and iterating on it. if you look up engineering on literally any reputable source, wikipedia or the ASME, or literally any professor of engineering, you well get one, very simple answer for what engineering is. its not a complicated philosophical question like morehead and mayhew like to pretend, you don't need to think about how "everything in society was designed". the simple answer is "engineering is the application of science to design". i guarantee, literally every mildly reputable source will give you some variation of that deifnition. now if you go to college for engineering, you will very quickly realize that no one teaches you how to built shit. in fact, you don't build anything until your senior design project. your first 3 years of classes are just science classes, nothing else. they're highly specialized science classes -- signal processing, control theory, sensing, electrodynamics, etc in electrical, statics, kinetics, dynamical systems, thermodynamics if you're in mechanical, etc. but ultimately, they're just science classes. the problem is that at the high school level, you just don't know science well enough to know anything about engineering. the first one i mentioned, signal processing, is a class all about fourier transforms, which is an integral of a complex numbers. that's not something you know. first thing you learn about in statics is the finite element method. line one of that is defining the deformation gradient tensor as the jacobian of the deformation -- you don't know what a jacobian is (multivar calc), or what a tensor is (linear algebra), or anything else. so there's no point in teaching you engineering! learn the math, learn the science
but yeah -- ultimately, there is no point in teaching "engineering" at the high school level -- you can have a shop class, and that's cool and useful and makes sure people can fix broken shit in their houses -- but don't pretend that's engineering. there is no such thing as teaching engineering at the high school level, because the physics and math background necessary for even the most basic things is extremely large -- which is why engineering classes tend to be bullshit like morehead does, or focus on CAD programs (which is also not engineering), or they tend to be overly general shit about the different fields of engineering
