---
title: Some random stuff about the American legal system (that's hopefully correct)
---

The American court system is based off of the English Common Law system. The english common law system was designed by some random-ass king of england who wanted to maintain law and order throughout his kingdom while also maintaining consistency -- the the idea was that he would nominate several magistrates, and those magistrates would ride around the country on horses, staying in an inn at each village for a day or two, and resolving any disputes.  This system worked fine, but was inconsistent -- so in a "brilliant" move, the random-ass king of england decided that his solution would be to make all the different magistrates respect each others decisions -- that's where the current american idea of precedent comes from. Judges ought to respect their prior decisions to maintain continuity in the law.

The American court system is based off of the English Common Law system. The english common law system was designed by some random-ass king of england who wanted to maintain law and order throughout his kingdom while also maintaining consistency -- the the idea was that he would nominate several magistrates, and those magistrates would ride around the country on horses, staying in an inn at each village for a day or two, and resolving any disputes.  This system worked fine, but was inconsistent -- so in a "brilliant" move, the random-ass king of england decided that his solution would be to make all the different magistrates respect each others decisions -- that's where the current american idea of precedent comes from. Judges ought to respect their prior decisions to maintain continuity in the law.

Now the American founding fathers were (nearly) all English lawyers, well versed in English Common Law, and they brought it with them.  Indeed, much of the American legal system is still just based on opinions written by random-ass English magistrates from the 1600s: virtually all of contract law, tort law (that's where one person harms another person and wants damages), property law, plus some of family law. However, over the next several hundred years, a couple of key changes happend to the American legal system. First, the idea of judicial review: The Chief Justice John Marshall decided to _give himself_ the power to declare things unconstitutional. Second, the concept of criminal statues -- as we moved from a feudal society where justice was decentralized, to a more urban, industrial soceity where the criminal justice system was highly institutionalized in the "prison", people began to feel that it was unfair for unelected judges to arbitrarily decide what's illegal and not illegal after the fact was a _bad idea_, and one of the precedents established pretty early on in America was that _criminal law_ should be developed through legislative statues -- if a legislative body has not written down the law, it is unethical for the state to use its massive power to enforce it against a person. With this, there become a more clear role for judges (that wasn't just interpreting past decisions): their job was the interpret the statutes. 

_However_, America still has jury trials! What's the relationship between the judge and the jury? The judge decides _matters of law_, i.e. interprets what the statute says -- which section of the law applies, what is the standard for convicting someone of murder, is it "recklessness" or "negligence" or "purpose", what is the maximum sentence, those sorts of questions. On the other hand, the jury decides _matters of fact_ -- the lawyers present evidence to the jury, and the jury decides "does this _evidence_ rise to the standard of "negligence", and the judge will give the jury simple instructions in plain English to fill out. That's how stuff can be appealed in the US court system, without violating the double jeopardy clause -- you're not being tried twice, the jury already decided one -- its just that the _matters of law_ that the district court judge decided on might be appealed. Now when a case gets to the supreme court, and you hear the supreme court "strikes down" a law, the supreme court normally does not just go around deciding things -- instead, when a particular case is brought, and _in order to resolve some other dispute_, one of the parties argues that "X law should not be enforced because its unconstitutional", the supreme court needs to make a decision, and _because of the idea of respecting precedent_, once the supreme court decides in one case that X law in unconstitutional, all other courts must abide by that precedent as well.

Ok, so why is that relevant to this case [Ruccho v. Common Cause]? In order to get a court to make a particular decision, that question needs to be a "matter of law", questions of statutory interpretation. What the supreme court concluded in that its simply not a question of statutory interpretation -- there is no _law_ that says "federal courts have the power to try cases about whether a particular redistricting plan has been gerrymandered or not", that is a political question. Politicans are the one who draw the maps, so if you don't like the maps they draw, vote for different politicians.
