# How cryptocurrency works

basically, it turns out, within a market economy, something only has value if people are willing to pay for it
if i decide that imma declare that you can pay \$1 to increment a variable on my computer, and you're willing to pay that dollar, then i can effectively use that as a form of currency
so as long as enough people are willing to buy and sell stuff with it, anything can have value
anyway, the problem with the variable example is that you have no reason to trust me. i could decrement that variable without telling you, and that would destroy the whole point, and you're probably not willing to pay \$1 for something that you can't trust
essentially, a bank is literally just that -- they have a big computer somewhere, and we all just happen to trust that if we go up to the bank and ask for \$1, they will accurately decrement the number in their computer systems and give us the dollar
but wait, why did we assume the dollar has value? in reality, the dollar only has value because other people are willing to exchange stuff for the dollar -- namely, the people on wall street are willing to give you stocks if you give them enough dollars. there's nothing special about wall street, it just happens to be that the vast majority of the dollars go through wall street
now what cryptocurrency does is that it says, "what if you didn't have to trust a bank? what if we all kept a copy of the variable -- then you wouldn't have to trust anyone -- and as long as we can do some mathematical trickery to make sure that everyone's copy of the variable is the same, and that as soon as someone tried to cheat, we could figure out who it is, we would have something that would effectively function as currency, at least among the people that accepted it"
so far, that's all economics. lets get into the mathematical trickery
essentially, we all keep copies of a ledger, and the ledger has entries like "Thomas gives Rito \$100". then, anyone with the ledger can look over the entire histoy of every transaction ever and figure out exactly how much money everyone has. But how do we know which copy of the ledger to trust? We all agree to follow a simple rule: the ledger with the most amount of "work" put into it is the one to trust. That means, is someone wants to cheat, they'll have to do more than 50% of all the work of everyone using the cryptocurrency, which is virtually impossible. What does work mean in this context? Well, what you do is you divide up the ledger into "blocks", and at the end of each block, you put a random number, and you make a rule that "in order for a block to be counted, the SHA1 hash of the entire block must start with 5 zeros". the SHA1 hash of something is basically just a "scramble" of it -- given a specific input, it will produce a random output, but always the same random output for that specific input string. there's no way to predict this, you literally just have to try random numbers until you find one that makes the SHA1 hash of the entire block start with five zeros. and once you've done that, you announce it to everyone, everyone checks that it works, and puts it on their ledger. and since everyone agreed, the ledger with the most work put into it, i.e. the most number of valid blocks, is the true one, we can guarantee that its impossible for a malicious actor to "take over" the entire thing -- they'd need to have more than 51% of all of the computational power

this whole technology is called "blockchain" btw
and it can be useful -- it gives you a way to keep some sort of data without having to trust any of the parties
i just think the idea of cryptocurrency is kinda silly. and the big reason is I don't know what problem it solves. If we were to completely revamp the US economy, there are a lot of changes I'd like to see made -- we should have universal health care, better public investment in schools, etc. Revamping the entire economy would be really hard, it would probably cause a massive stock market crash, cause millions of families to lose their savings, force millions of companies out of business, on a scale worse than the great depression. Maybe I'd be fine with that if there were some amazing benefits. But bitcoin doesn't have any amazing benefits. The problem that cryptocurrency solves is the problem of trusting your bank. but that's not a problem that even exists today. when was the last time a major bank just thanos snapped money out of people's accounts? it doesn't happen! it's literally a made up problem! And in the mean time, cryptocurrency wastes a massive amount of energy and eats up the supply of graphics cards, and it literally takes like 1 hr for a transaction to be completed 
oh also bitcoin isn't anonymous and anyone that says it is doesn't know anything about cybersecurity
bitcoin makes every single transaction public. while the ledge doesn't explicitly say "Rito gives Thomas \$100", it says "0b1f42 gives 683fg8 \$100", the second I make that transaction, Thomas knows my bitcoin ID, and I know his. Now, every single person that you ever gives money to can see every transaction you ever made. And if you see "0b1f42 gives afb562 \$50", you can go online and trivially find out that afb562 is Trader Joes's official bitcoin address. And realize, every single transaction you've ever made is publically visible there. Every. Single. One. So just think about the amount of data there is, and how trivial it is to find out who it would be
like i often draw the analogy to reddit accounts. In theory, reddit accounts are anonymous, and some people regularly wipe their reddit accounts, so they are actually anonymous. But for someone like me, you might notice that I'm subscribed to r/Riverside, so you know where to look, then you might notice I'm subscribed to r/Debate, so I'm probably a high schooler who does debate, then you can go on the RUSD website and find out that STEM and King are the only two schools that offer debate, you might notice I'm subbed to r/programming, so you choose to look at STEM first, and you come to stem and ask "Hey is there anyone here that would be subscribed to r/factorio and also r/rust", and you've found me using nothing but which subreddits I'm subscribed to
now imagine doing the same thing, but with every single payment you've ever made in your entire life
with no possibility of wiping your account

# Bitcoin as a Ponzi Scheme:

like the total amount of money that gets put into bitcoin exactly equals the total amount of money that comes out
and some people have gained a lot of money from bitcoin -- some people have gained billions of dollars. that necessarily means that some other people (or likely, a whole bunch of people) will lose billions of dollars
a ponzi scheme is a scheme which survives by constantly recruiting new members. as long as its able to recruit new members, it can use those new members to pay off its old members. but eventually, it must run out of new members, and the whole scheme will come crashing down. and because the number of new members grows exponentially (with a base of 2), that means 50% of the total people in the scheme (all the last new members) will lose all the money they put in

bitcoin, and every other cryptocurrency is exactly that -- as long as they can keep getting new people to put money into the pot, then a handful of people can take a whole lot of money out. But if that handful of people are taking a whole lot more money out than they put in, that necessarily means that a whole bunch of other people are losing their money.
now bitcoins defenders will claim that "bitcoin is just like a stock", its value fluctuates like the stock market. And they'd be right. The stock market is a ponzi scheme. There's just one key difference though -- in a stock market, the lowest "new members" are the consumers, the people buying the product at the end, and its totally ok if they aren't paid back, cause y'know, they paid for the product. The "running out of new members" problem still exists, and that's why we have recessions. Eventually, some investor is gonna realize "hey, we've put so much money into the pot, and there aren't enough consumers for all of us to make a profit, so its gonna be investors who are gonna start losing money", and that's what causes the business cycle
admittedly, most investors probably don't think of it in terms of ponzi schemes, they probably just think about supply and demand (supply is exceeding demand, so prices are going to fall, which means the stock price isn't going to continue to grow as rapidly, so I should sell my stock), but the two formulations are equivalent

https://www.insider.com/dogecoin-co-creator-jackson-palmer-slams-cryptocurrency-2021-7

> After years of studying it, I believe that cryptocurrency is an inherently right-wing, hyper-capitalistic technology built primarily to amplify the wealth of its proponents through a combination of tax avoidance, diminished regulatory oversight and artificially enforced scarcity.
he's exactly right here -- cryptocurrency is more heinous than stocks in another way. Its impossible to regulate, impossible to tax -- basically, they've built the ultimate free market
> Despite claims of “decentralization”, the cryptocurrency industry is controlled by a powerful cartel of wealthy figures who, with time, have evolved to incorporate many of the same institutions tied to the existing centralized financial system they supposedly set out to replace
