---
title: Significant Figures
tags: [math]
---

The idea behind Sig Figs is very simple -- when we do a measurement of something that is not an exact quantity (like `4 apples`). Now in theory, we could write out the error very precisely with a $\pm$ sign, like $4.05 \text{ cm} \pm 0.01$, and that would be perfectly fine. But then, what happens when you multiply two numbers? You have to distribute. Great. $$(4.05 \text{ cm} \pm 0.01)(4.05 \text{ cm} \pm 0.01) = 4.05^2 \pm 2 \cdot 4.05 \cdot 0.01 + 0.01$$. Imagine keeping track of that through a normal calculation. Its virtually impossible. Yeuch.

There's a significantly simpler method, which is what nearly everyone uses in higher level science -- simply take the lower bound, and do your calculations, and then take the upper bound, and do your calculations. So in this case, you'd take $4.04 \cdot 4.04 = 16.3216$ and $4.06 \cdot 4.06 = 16.4836$. That's not so bad, we still had to do twice the work, which is unfortunate, and the method that we came up with isn't perfect (its not too hard to come up with a situation in which this breaks, if you have one variable in the numerator and one in the denominator, the lower bound of the whole thing must use the upper bound of the denominator and the lower bound of the numerator, but as functions get more and more complex, with different increasing and decreasing portions, you can imagine that figuring out the lower and upper bounds might not be too easy). Nonetheless, this method is simple enough and accurate enough that it is quite widely used. 

Unfortunately, making your students do every calculation twice in an intro-level chemistry class is a giant waste of time, and also inconvenient if you're doing research and need to do quick calculations in your head. Hence, we introduce sig figs. Sig figs are a _convention_ that makes it possible to _imply_ that error simply in the way that we write the number down. The convention we adopt is very simple -- the last significant digit is assumed to be uncertain, and we usually assume this uncertainty to be $\pm 1$. For example, if I report that something is $1.86$, that implies $1.86 \pm 0.01$. 

Once you understand that sig figs are _just_ a shorthand way to writing uncertainty, all the rules pretty naturally fall out. The Zumdahl book gives the following rules for counting the number of significant digits:

1. Nonzero integers are always significant. Well no shit, of course they are, they aren't zero. 
2. Leading zeros are never significant. Again, no shit, if they were, every number would have infinite significant digits. 
3. Captive zeros are always significant. Again, no shit, if you say something is 303.15, that 0 in between the two threes is obviously significant. 
4. Trailing zeros are significant _only after the decimal place_. This isn't entirely obvious, but still quite intuitive -- obviously, if you have a number is 325,000 Pa, then the digit that's uncertain is the 5, so the zeros after the 5 are significant. You could just as easily write it as 3.25 x 10^5. On the other hand, if you have 3.2500, we decide that those extra zeros do carry information -- in particular, they're telling us that the measurement uncertainty for 3.2500 is $\pm 0.0001$ (i.e. the last digit is uncertain). 
5. And finally, exact numbers have infinite significant digits -- this is just a way of saying that exact numbers shouldn't limit the number of significant digits. 

Similarly, with this perspective, the rules for arithmetic are similarly intuitive. For addition and subtraction. If you have $(4.05 \pm 0.01) + (150 \pm 10)$ , then that $\pm 10$ is gonna totally dominate, and your answer is still gonna be $150$. Notice, $150$ means "I have a number between 140 and 160" -- if you add $4.05$ to that number, your number is still (probably) between 140 and 160. You just line up all the digits, and the last significant digit should be the greatest last significant digit it was before -- since its error is going to dominate, and the other error is insignificant. 

And the same applies to multiplication rules. If you have a number like 4.36, and you multiply it by 5, well that 5 is actually $5 \pm 1$, and the $\pm 0.01$ on the 4.36 is negligible in comparison, so we get $4.36 \cdot (5 \pm 1) = 4.36 \cdot 5 \pm 4.36$, which means we should report the answer as $20$, because 20 implies $20 \pm 10$, which accurately shows what our uncertainty is (in reality, it should be $21.8 \pm 4.36$, which means "a number between 17.44 and 26.16", which is accurately encompassed by $20 \pm 10$, which tells us a "number between 10 and 30". 

Its useful to look at multiplication by 10 to better understand the rule for multiplication. $10.00 \cdot 5$, which implies $(10.00 \pm 0.01) \cdot (5 \pm 1)$. Again, the $\pm 1$ on the 5 will dominate the uncertainty, so we can write $10.00 \cdot (5 \pm 1)$, which means "the answer is somewhere between 40 and 60. Notice, the level of uncertainty exactly corresponds with the number of significant digits in $5$. If instead of $5$, we had $25$ (a number between 24 and 26), then we'd get $250$ (a number between 240 and 260) after the multiplication -- the number of significant digits in the answer is directly equal to the number of significant digits in the input. The number with more significant digits (i.e. a smaller uncertainty), essentially just moves the other number around by a constant factor, it doesn't really change the uncertainty. 

The last point that bears comment is that, _unlike a lot of teachers tell you to do_, when you have a complicated calculation, you also need to work out the number of sig figs at each step. In other words, if you have (4.05 - 4.01) / 3.00, you need to look at each step, say "ok, 4.05 - 4.01 is 0.04, which has 1 sig fig, so when I divide it by 3.00, I should report only 0.01 (1 sf), not 0.0133 (3 sf)". The reason this is important is because, again, if you think about the error, $(4.05 \pm 0.01) - (4.01 \pm 0.01)$ will give you $(0.01 \pm 0.01)$ (actually this should be $\pm 0.02$, but sig figs is a simplication that breaks down at these small quantities). But notice -- out uncertainty is now literally as big as our measurement! That measurement carries _very_ little information. So reporting it after the division with 3 sig figs is just plain wrong, it gives a misleading idea of how accurate the data actually is.  So yes, you do need to track the number of sig figs are each step of the calculation. You can't just let your calculator do it, and then guess the final number of sig figs. That is a bit of extra work, reminiscent of the expanding that we had to do in the first approach, but just remember, its better than having to do the entire calculation twice. 

Finally, as I alluded to in the previous paragraph, sig figs aren't perfect. They are a simplification, and they do break down in some cases. For a _fascinating_ look at when this happens, check out this paper
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/ed064p471.1
and this one 
https://zero.sci-hub.se/1533/490a6940d397628d8ec917ade9ff3993/schwartz1985.pdf?download=true
and this one
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/ed068p400

P.S. i used the words "accuracy" and "precision" interchangably in this, but that's not entirely true, they are technically different, and sig figs do not necessarily actually encode the systematic error (accuracy) in a result, only the random error (precision) -- see the first link for a more detailed look into that
