---
title: NATO -- A Force for Good or Bad?
tags: [politics]
---

Based on a conversation I had around 28 February 2022 regarding NATO. The conversation was ultimately about whether NATO is a "net-good", and began with a discussion about whether NATO is _responsible_ for the Iraq War. I've cataloged and polished up some of my arguments in that conversation here. 

I think NATO is significantly responsible for the Iraq War, for the following reasons:

* **International Support**. Bush would not have invaded without the support of the UK and Australia and Poland, that emboldened him, made him confident that the international community would not condemn him (or perhaps that they could not). 
* **Ideology**. The existence of NATO implicitly justified the US's role as police of the world -- we already had what amounted to an empire of countries we policed, why not expand
* **Logistics**. I forget the details here, but i seem to recall that there was some controversy over where troops could land -- turkey would not allow NATO troops to land there, but some other countries would -- I'm fairly confident NATO was critical to the actual logistics that allowed the Iraq War to happen

Obviously NATO isn't the direct cause of the war (Bush and Cheney's actions are) -- but it think NATO was probably a necessary (but definitely not sufficient) condition.

## Would the Iraq War have happened without NATO?

I don't think America would have been in a position to see itself as the world police had it not already established itself as the police over the NATO countries. NATO _is_ the American empire, and without it, we just wouldn't have the support to conduct these invasions. As matter of concrete material things, around a third of the armed forces in the Iraq War were from other NATO countries, NATO is how we facilitated our troop training operations, NATO was crucial to how we supplied troops in the areas. Perhaps any one of these is surmountable, but I think there's enough of them that altogether, without NATO, it just couldn't have happened -- like i think both materially and ideologically, NATO is a prerequisite to a lot of US intervention around the world, including in Iraq.
 

Further, I don't buy that NATO is a purely defensive alliance -- Article 5 is barely ever invoked, but NATO does tons of other stuff, whether its intelligence sharing or collaborative troop exercises or sharing military technology or even just consulting each other before decisions (all of which is essentially offensive, in the sense that the rest of the world has nothing but America's promise that "this is a defensive alliance pinky promise" to believe that it's _not_ offensive). NATO represents something much greater: it represents the American empire, the idea that we've folded a massive chunk of the world into our sphere of influence, it embodies the idea that we're the world's police (interventions in Bosnia, Kosovo, and Libya as notable examples).

The discussion here moved to the broader question of whether NATO, overall, is a net-good. Some people argued that NATO is good because it resists China and Russia, and also that NATO is good because of nuclear disarmament. -- I'll address each argument in turn. 

## Does NATO effectively resist China?
I don't buy the argument about NATO resisting china, mostly because NATO is a military alliance, while china's imperialism is overwhelmingly non-militaristic, through 
    (a) economic investment, like they've been doing in several African countries as well as poorer south/east Asian ones, whether its through the BRI (building like ports and power plants and highways for them) or just with FDIs (foreign direct investment) and 
    (b) ethnic expansion (or perhaps this should be called settler colonialism?) -- the kind of thing they've done in Tibet and are currently doing in xinjiang. 

NATO doesn't have the power to oppose either of these as a military alliance (and they can't exactly oppose economic investment in other countries when their whole thing is "free trade"). If NATO wanted to oppose china, we'd stop buying their shit (or we wouldn't have made free trade deals which allowed manufacturing to be moved from NATO countries to china in the first place), but of course, that's never gonna happen cause its bad for capitalists in NATO countries.


## NATO's History
i think its important to look at NATO's history, as a brief list (shamelessly stealing from Wikipedia): 

* Gulf War (following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait), 
* intervention in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
* Intervention in Kosovo, 
* War in Iraq, 
* War in Afghanistan, 
* Gulf of Aden anti-piracy (Somalian pirates)
* Libyan intervention

It seems clear to me that all of those needed NATO (you could not argue that any of these could have happened _without_ NATO) -- they had troops from other countries, involved military in like the Mediterranean sea or turkey or other countries, they had money from other countries, and as I argued earlier, i don't think they could have been ideologically justified without NATO envisioning itself as a "peacekeeping" force for the world


Of those, I think we'd inarguably agree that the gulf war, Iraq, Afghanistan, and Libya were mistakes. In the Somalian pirates, apparently Russia, China, and South Korea also sent vessels in support of NATO, so I think that one's a wash, it would have happened more-or-less the same without NATO. That leaves Kosovo and Bosnia. In Kosovo, we kinda just bombed the shit out of Yugoslavia which killed a bunch of civilians but did actually end the war. Perhaps that was a net good, but perhaps the war would have ended anyway, its not clear to me. In Bosnia, I think we were supported by a ton of non-NATO troops because there was a genocide going on. Though NATO was fighting for "the good guys", the UN pursued the same goals so its hard to put that solely on NATO's shoulders. Overall, I don't think that's a good track record, its leaning pretty heavily on the "net bad" side. At least 4/7 were flat-out mistakes, one was good but would have certainly happened either way, Kosovo seems like its not definitive either side (simply because of the civilian casualties), leaving Bosnia as the only "probably good".

## Deterrence against Russia
Deterring Russia from invading Eastern Europe is a more compelling example -- maybe if NATO ceases to exist, Russia simply  decides that it would rather not have Poland or Ukraine or whatever existing on its border and simply decides to invade.

The question amounts to "if NATO were Thanos-snapped, would Russia invade Poland or the Baltic states or turkey". I think that's definitely a compelling argument -- Russia (post-soviet union) has a history of invading places, whether its Chechnya or Georgia or Crimea or now the rest of Ukraine. 

But I think there's potentially an equally compelling argument that NATO's expansion is what caused at least some of these actions from Russia (this isn't necessarily a question about whose to blame, because of course Russia is to blame, but merely thinking about whether it would have played out differently in a world where NATO didn't exist). Indeed, the international relations scholar John Mearsheimer makes [this argument with regards to Ukraine](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JrMiSQAGOS4), and while don't fully buy his argument, it definitely makes the case for arguing that NATO is good harder.

Nonetheless, that doesn't really answer the question though -- that if NATO vanished tomorrow, would Russia try to take advantage of it in a bad way, and i think the answer there is probably yes -- it can be simultaneously true that NATO caused the conflict in the past, but if it stopped existing, that would spark more conflict in the future. So maybe, just for its deterrence against Russia, its worth keeping NATO around, though I don't doubt I'll be eating my words when the US decides that it's gonna topple the government of Angola in 2024.


## Economic Deterrence
There's also an argument about economic deterrence -- Russia has now realized that it cannot invade another country without its economy being crippled by the west kicking it out of its financial institutions and shit, and without its oligarchs losing fuck tons of money -- I'm fairly confident that if the invasion of Ukraine continues going as poorly as it has, they're never gonna do this again. At that point, deterrence against Russia is no longer a point for NATO, and I really don't see any compelling argument that NATO is a net-good. Of course, that doesn't justify _immediately_ dissolving NATO, for all the reasons in the previous section (Russia taking advantage of it), but it does definitely warrant examining NATO a little more closely. 

## Nuclear Disarmament
Nuclear Disarmament would be great -- but I'm skeptical of NATO leadership there -- the NPT was lead by NATO, and what we got was a treaty that said "America, the UK, France, Russia, and China can have nukes, the rest of y'all can't", which is really not progress -- it means that small countries are left with two choice, either denuclearize independently in violation of the NPT (like India or Israel or North Korea or Pakistan) or try to seek shelter under a nuclear country (like Belarus for Russia, or Belgium/Germany/Netherlands/Italy/turkey for NATO) -- and its hard for NATO to tell them to denuclearize when NATO has a history of writing the rules to be favorable for itself. Ultimately, NATO essentially said "nukes for me, not for thee" and is expecting the world to go along with it, and that approach is just not gonna work.

But the reason NATO is taking that approach is the same reason the US engages in these invasions in the first place -- its what Mearsheimer dubs the "false promise of liberal hegemony", its the idea that the US can reshape the world into its own liberal-democratic image, and idea which follows immediately from liberalism's core tenets. 

Liberalism's argument is the following: If individual rights are universal, that must mean that states which do not grant them (i.e. are not liberal democracies) are essentially at war with their own people. Liberal states do not go to war with each other (due to economic interdependence), so therefore, to end war, we ought to expand liberal democracy. This is essentially how Bush justified his interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan, its how the US has justified regime change in nearly every Latin American country, Iran, Vietnam, and Libya, and basically everywhere else. Its this philosophy that justifies the "nukes for me, not for thee" attitude, and its essentially inseparable from NATO.
