---
title  : My Changing Politics
tags: [politics]
---

I suppose this started with me noticing places where lefist commentators who I really liked were just _wrong_ -- I distinctly remember two, may three distinct commentators who I really respected confidently, very explicitly predicting that there was no chance that the Taliban would take over if the US pulled out, there were only a few hundred US soldiers left anyway, they weren't doing anything, the Taliban were confined to a small part of Afghanistan, etc, etc. And as we found out, this was just, flatly _wrong_. Way earlier than that, back in January 2020, I remember a handful of leftists I followed online very confidently claiming that COVID wouldn't be significant, that it was just sinophobic fearmongering, and that it would go away within a month. This was also just _wrong_. Later in 2021, I vistited India, and this time, I was very deliberately, out of curiosity, looking for the effects of 30 years of communist party rule in West Bengal -- and the more I looked, and the most I read, I couldn't escape the conclusion that the communist party promoting labor agitation had basically caused all industry to avoid the state like the plague, which was inarguably worse for the people there. You can visibly _see_ the difference in abject poverty if you compare Kolkata to Bangalore or other cities in India. I could keep going -- leftists being _wrong_ about which COVID policies were effective (we're getting more and more evidence that school closures simply weren't), leftists being wrong about the impacts of a strike.

These were not people who were secretly conservative, or simply didn't apply the "principles of leftism" accurately enough, they weren't just class traitors or just "not well read enough" -- they all had genuine, compelling arguments for the things they believe at these points, the arguments were broadly in line with what I wuld consider to be leftist thinking, but it just turned out, that they were wrong. 

Somewhat coincidentally, around the same time, I was reading a lot about the history and philosophy of science -- the history of physics, from Newton's Laws to Electromagnetism to Quantum Mechanics, from the development of germ theory to modern medicine, and the like. My biggest takeaway from this was that human intuitions are fucking _terrible_ when it comes to predicting things about the natural world. We've been conditioned from a very early age to find some of these ideas very intuitive ("inertia says that stuff keeps moving unless there's a force on it"), but they really aren't, and people like Aristotle, who were extremely intelligent, did not believe them. Electromagnetism, and the discovery that these funny experiments with batteries and capacitors and weird rocks were _the same damn thing as the light you see with your eyes_, is _profoundly unintuitive_. I probably don't need to tell you that quantum mechanics is _profoundly unintuitive_ -- our monkey brains are just really badly evolved at figuring out how the world actually works, and the point of the scientific method is to tame that. And this doesn't just apply to "old" things -- it's very much present. Some of the books I read, Lost in Math (Sabine Hossenfelder) and Lee Smollin's critique of String Theory, both essentially argue that physicists have been been guided by their aesthetic senses in creating ideas like string theory and supersymmetry and a million particles -- and that's why a lot of the ideas haven't panned out. The same thing is true in medicine -- some 42% of drugs fail Phase III clinical trials, and in specializations like Neurology and Oncology, [this number is as high as 70-80%](https://ascpt.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1038/sj.clpt.6100479). These are not stupid people, they are extremely intelligent people with a stunning amount of specialized knowledge, with really good mechanistic reasons for believing a particular drug would work -- but it just empirically doesn't, and the reason for that is the world is weird and unpredictable, and human intuition and reasons is _exceptionally limit_. 

The emphasis of most of what I read ended up being the importance of randomized controll trials where possible, trying to stay extremely close to experimentally and mathematically verified facts, and trying to avoid the influence of human intuition. One phrase that popped up a few times, that I really liked was "If it doesn't have error bars, it's not science". 

So if in these extremely rigid scientific fields, if people are unable to make predictions with accuracy -- why the actual fuck should I care about people speculating about human _society_, which is indisputably far more complicated? You could try to make an argument that human intuition is more familiar with human social roles, so can make predictions about it better, but I just don't believe that. It seems far more likely that the reason we have so many competing philosophies in sociology is that we just don't have any way to actually run experiments on human behavior. But that doesn't mean we should just blindly make wrong predictions, and we certainly shouldn't be putting a misplaced confidence in those predictions. Indeed, all the examples of places where leftists were wrong, they certainly didn't have error bars. If they put error bars on them, they probably wouldn't be able to make any substantive predictions at all. So... what do we do about that?

And as I thought about it, Marxism really had to be the worst example of this -- for all it's claims about being "scientific socialism", the core of Marxist thought is an _entirely_ non-experimental claim from human intuition. At the most basic level, Marxism starts from a claim that capitalists and workers have opposing interests -- but the very fact that we should block people into those two groups, and average over them, is not an empirically verified assumption (we could be in a Simpson's paradox situation). Indeed, capitalists _in a particular company_ might have opposing interests to workers _in that company_, but their interests might line up with workers _altogether_ -- the interests might line up that ruthlessly exploiting one group of workers results in cheap goods for another, and perhaps that latter group is much larger. At the most basic level, Marxism is a claim from human intuition about the interests of different groups of people, but it's an intuition that's shockingly easy to falsify if you think about it.

So these days, my politics tend to be very deliberately utilitarian. I try to make sure that I can find actual, hard experimental  evidence to support the value of any policy I support, and I try to be very comfortable with just saying "I don't know" -- cause that's probably the only accurate answer to most of these questions. If I can't put error bars on it, then the error bars are probably massive. There are some problems with this, of course -- it's not very _practical_, if you're a politician or an activist, saying I don't know is thoroughly impractical. Utilitarianism also fails some pretty obvious intuitive requirements of a good moral philosophy -- it doesn't penalize theft (the utility in me having something is a priori exactly the same as you having something -- but at least its quantifiable and measurable, it takes the problematic intuitions of the process. 
